Kommandozeilenliteraturkritik - "In the Beginning was The Command Line" von Neal Stephenson
###########################################################################################
:date: 2014-05-30 10:22
:author: marco.bakera
:tags: Bildung, Informatik, Linux
:tags: BeOS, cli, Linux, Windows
:slug: kommandozeilenliteraturkritik-in-the-beginning-was-the-command-line-von-neal-stephenson
:status: published

|Kommandozeile|

Es gibt Bücher, die liest man und denkt: "Ja, genau" ... "Stimmt" ...
"Auf jeden Fall" ... "So habe ich das noch gar nicht gesehen, aber da
ist was dran". Kurzum: Bücher, die einem aus der Seele sprechen und die
eigene Position untermauern. "`In The Beginning was The Command
Line <http://www.cryptonomicon.com/beginning.html>`__" von Neal
Stephenson ist ein solches Buch - in der deutschen Version trägt es den
reißerischen Titel *Die Diktatur des schönen Scheins - Wie grafische
Oberflächen die Computernutzer entmündigen*. Bereits 1999 erschienen,
beschreibt es mehr als nur die Historie der Betriebssysteme Windows,
MacOS und Unix - nebenbei auch etwas BeOS. Es sind nicht nur technische
Details, die Stephenson anspricht und anprangert. Es geht um Metaphern,
die jedes OS für sich mitbringt. Das sind Metaphern der Bedienung
(Kommandozeile vs. GUI), der Verbreitung (OpenSource vs. ClosedSource)
oder der Zielgruppe (Anfänger vs. Profi). Auf vielen unterschiedlichen
Ebenen lassen sich diese Metaphern finden und Stephenson findet sie
alle. Geschickt zeichnet er zahlreiche kluge Analogien, um seine Thesen
zu untermauern und erzeugt ein konsistentes Gesamtbild, in dem die
kommerziellen Betriebssysteme nicht gut abschneiden.

Am Ende der Lektüre mache ich ein Konsolenfenster auf und blicke
nostalgisch verklärt auf den Cursor. So habe ich es vor vielen Jahren
getan und so werden es wohl auch noch Generationen nach mir tun -
hoffentlich.

Ich lasse das Buch und den Autor für sich sprechen, indem ich die
spannendsten Passagen  unten zusammenfasse. Natürlich ganz subjektiv.

Das Buch kannst du übrigens kostenlos von der Webseite heruntergeladen.

--------------

 

*Bill Gates and Paul Allen came up with an idea even stranger and more
fantastical: selling computer operating systems.*

| *When we used actual telegraph equipment (teletypes) or their
  higher-tech substitutes ("glass teletypes," or the MS-DOS command
  line) to work with our computers, we were very close to the bottom of
  that stack. When we use most modern operating systems, though, our
  interaction with the machine is heavily mediated*
| *(it is commonly the case with technologies that you can get the best
  insight about how they work by watching them fail).*

*But to the MacOS, the screen was not a teletype, but a place to put
graphics; the image on the screen was a bitmap, a literal rendering of
the contents of a particular portion of the computer's memory. When the
computer crashed and wrote gibberish into the bitmap, the result was
something that looked vaguely like static on a broken television set--a
"snow crash."*

*Gnu is an acronym for Gnu's Not Unix, but this is a joke in more ways
than one, because GNU most certainly IS Unix,. Because of trademark
concerns ("Unix" is trademarked by AT&T) they simply could not claim
that it was Unix, and so, just to be extra safe, they claimed that it
wasn't.*

*But it is the fate of operating systems to become free.*

*Companies that sell OSes exist in a sort of technosphere. Underneath is
technology that has already become free. Above is technology that has
yet to be developed, or that is too crazy and speculative to be
productized just yet. Like the Earth's biosphere, the technosphere is
very thin compared to what is above and what is below.*

*I have learned much more about Microsoft by using the Linux operating
system than I ever would have done by using Windows).*

*Microsoft is making money by taking advantage of differences in the
price of technology in different times*

*Disney and Apple/Microsoft are in the same business: short-circuiting
laborious, explicit verbal communication with expensively designed
interfaces.*

*Back in the days of the command-line interface, users were all Morlocks
who had to convert their thoughts into alphanumeric symbols and type
them in, a grindingly tedious process that stripped away all ambiguity,
laid bare all hidden assumptions, and cruelly punished laziness and
imprecision.*

*There is massively promiscuous metaphor-mixing going on here, and I
could deconstruct it 'til the cows come home, but I won't.*

*What we're really buying is a system of metaphors.*

*But because the VCR was invented when it was--during a sort of awkward
transitional period between the era of mechanical interfaces and
GUIs--it just had a bunch of pushbuttons on the front, and in order to
set the time you had to push the buttons in just the right way. This
must have seemed reasonable enough to the engineers responsible for it,
but to many users it was simply impossible. Thus the famous blinking
12:00 that appears on so many VCRs. Computer people call this "the
blinking twelve problem".*

*But the price that we Mac owners had to pay for superior aesthetics and
engineering was not merely a financial one. There was a cultural price
too, stemming from the fact that we couldn't open up the hood and mess
around with it.*

*Note the obsessive use of abbreviations and avoidance of capital
letters;*

*For reasons already explained, Apple had no desire to see the cost of
hardware drop. The only reason Torvalds had cheap hardware was
Microsoft.*

*In trying to understand the Linux phenomenon, then, we have to look not
to a single innovator but to a sort of bizarre Trinity: Linus Torvalds,
Richard Stallman, and Bill Gates. Take away any of these three and Linux
would not exist.*

*For the same reasons, Linux is worth trying. It is a strange country
indeed, but you don't have to live there; a brief sojourn suffices to
give some flavor of the place and--more importantly--to lay bare
everything that is taken for granted, and all that could have been done
differently, under Windows or MacOS.*

*You can't try it unless you install*

*Microsoft and Apple do things the Manhattan way, with vast complexity
hidden behind a wall of interface. Linux does things the Egypt way, with
vast complexity strewn about all over the landscape.*

*Debian (the word is a contraction of "Deborah" and "Ian")*

*I have been running Linux every day since late 1995 and have seen many
application programs go down in flames, but I have never seen the
operating system crash. Never. Not once. There are quite a few Linux
systems that have been running continuously and working hard for months
or years without needing to be rebooted.*

*Commercial OS vendors, as a direct consequence of being commercial, are
forced to adopt the grossly disingenuous position that bugs are rare
aberrations, usually someone else's fault, and therefore not really
worth talking about in any detail.*

*Because Linux is not commercial--because it is, in fact, free, as well
as rather difficult to obtain, install, and operate--it does not have to
maintain any pretensions as to its reliability. Consequently, it is much
more reliable*

*BeOS missing megalomaniacal figurehead to harness and focus developer
rage*

*GUIs tend to impose a large overhead on every single piece of software*

*Computers give us more choices than we really want. We prefer to make
those choices once, or accept the defaults handed to us by software
companies, and let sleeping dogs lie. But when an OS gets changed, all
the dogs jump up and start barking.*

*The mass of the proton, the strength of gravity, the range of the weak
nuclear force, and a few dozen other fundamental constants completely
determine what sort of universe will emerge from a Big Bang. If these
values had been even slightly different, the universe would have been a
vast ocean of tepid gas or a hot knot of plasma or some other basically
uninteresting thing--a dud, in other words.*

*Every time your right pinky slams that ENTER key, you are making
another try. In some cases the operating system does nothing. In other
cases it wipes out all of your files. In most cases it just gives you an
error message. In other words, you get many duds. But sometimes, if you
have it all just right, the computer grinds away for a while and then
produces something like emacs.*

*universe -G 6.672e-11 -e 1.602e-19 -h 6.626e-34 -protonmass
1.673e-27....*

*if you don't like having choices made for you, you should start making
your own.*

.. |Kommandozeile| image:: http://www.bakera.de/wp/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Kommandozeile.png
   :class: alignnone size-full wp-image-1033
   :width: 807px
   :height: 54px
